h1. Yii DB Migrations

A database migrations engine for the Yii framework. It comes in the form of an
extension which can be dropped into any existing Yii framework application.

It relies on the database abstraction layer of the Yii framework to talk to the
database engine.

It's largely inspired on the migrations functionality of the Ruby on Rails
framework.

h2. Why bother in the first place?

You might wonder why you need database migrations in the first place. Sure, you
could use plain SQL files to apply updates to the database, but they have a big
disadvantage: they are database specific.

Imagine you initially create your database using SQLite and later on decide to
change to MySQL. When you use plain SQL files, you will need to rewrite them
using MySQL's flavor of SQL. Also, you will need to create some tool that knows
what has been applied already to the database and what's not applied yet.

Meet database migrations. By defining a higher level interface to creating and
maintaining the database schema, you can define it in a database agnostic way.

By using PHP functions to create tables, indexes, fields, ... you can write the
schema once and apply it to any database backend supported. The added bonus is
that the yii-dbmigrations extension keeps track of which migrations have been
applied already and which ones still need to be applied.

h2. Current limitations

Be aware that the current version is still very alpha.

There are only two database engines supported:
* MySQL
* SQLite

In the current version, it's only possible to migrate up, it cannot (yet) remove
already installed migrations.

h2. Installing the extension

h3. Putting the files in the right location

Installing the extension is quite easy. Once you downloaded the files from 
github, you need to put all the files in a folder called "yii-dbmigrations" and
put it in the <code>protected/extensions</code> folder from your project.

h3. Configuring the database connection

You need to make sure you configure database access properly in the 
configuration file of your project. As the console applications in the Yii
framework look at the <code>protected/config/console.php</code> file, you need
to make sure you configure the <code>db</code> settings under the
<code>components</code> key in the configuration array. For MySQL, the 
configuration will look as follows:

<pre>
'components' => array(
    'db'=>array(
        'class' => 'CDbConnection',
        'connectionString'=>'mysql:host=localhost;dbname=my_db',
        'charset' => 'UTF8',
        'username'=>'root',
        'password'=>'root',
    ),
),
</pre>

For SQLite, the configuration looks as follows:

<pre>
'components' => array(
    'db'=>array(
        'connectionString'=>'sqlite:'.dirname(__FILE__).'/../data/my_db.db',
    ),
),
</pre>

h3. Configuring the command map

To make the <code>yiic</code> tool know about the <code>migrate</code> command,
you need to add a <code>commandMap</code> key to the application configuration.

In there, you need to put the following configuration:

<pre>
'commandMap' => array(
    'migrate' => array(
        'class'=>'application.extensions.yii-dbmigrations.CDbMigrationCommand',
    ),
),
</pre>

h3. Testing your installation

To test if the installation was succesfull, you can run the yiic command and
should see the following output:

<pre>
Yii command runner (based on Yii v1.0.6)
Usage: protected/yiic <command-name> [parameters...]

The following commands are available:
 - migrate
 - message
 - shell
 - webapp

To see individual command help, use the following:
   protected/yiic help <command-name>
</pre>

It should mention that the <code>migrate</code> command is available.

h2. Creating migrations

You can create migrations by creating files in the 
<code>protected/migrations</code> folder or in the <code>migrations</code>
folder inside your module. The file names for the migrations
should follow a specific naming convention:

<pre>
m20090614213453_MigrationName.php
</pre>

The migration file names always start with the letter m followed by 14 digit
timestamp and an underscore. After that, you can give a name to the migration so
that you can easily identify the migration.

If your migration is part of a module, it's a good idea to add the name of the
module between the migration ID and name so that the name looks as follows:

<pre>
m20090614213453_ModuleName_MigrationName.php
</pre>

This will ensure that there is much less chance for naming conflicts between
migrations in different modules.

In the migration file, you need to create a class that extends the parent class
<code>CDbMigration</code>. The <code>CDbMigration</code> class needs to have the
<code>up</code> and <code>down</code> methods as you can see in the following
sample migration:

<pre>
class m20090611153243_CreateTables extends CDbMigration {

    public function up() {

        $this->createTable(
            'posts',
            array(
                array('id', 'primary_key'),
                array('title', 'string'),
                array('body', 'text'),
            )
        );

        $this->addIndex(
            'posts', 'posts_title', array('title')
        );

    }

    public function down() {
        $this->removeTable('posts');
    }

}
</pre>

h2. Applying migrations

Once you created the migrations, you can apply them to your database by running
the <code>migrate</code> command:

<pre>
protected/yiic migrate
</pre>

You will see the following output:

<pre>
Creating initial schema_version table
Applying migration: m20090611153243_CreateTables
    >> Creating table: posts
    >> Adding index posts_title to table: posts
Marking migration as applied: m20090611153243_CreateTables
Applying migration: m20090612162832_CreateTags
    >> Creating table: tags
    >> Creating table: post_tags
    >> Adding index post_tags_post_tag to table: post_tags
Marking migration as applied: m20090612162832_CreateTags
Applying migration: m20090612163144_RenameTagsTable
    >> Renaming table: post_tags to: post_tags_link_table
Marking migration as applied: m20090612163144_RenameTagsTable
Applying migration: m20090616153243_Test_CreateTables
    >> Creating table: test_pages
    >> Adding index test_pages_title to table: test_pages
Marking migration as applied: m20090616153243_Test_CreateTables
</pre>

It will apply all the migrations found in the
<code>protected/migrations</code> directory provided they were not applied to
the database yet.

It will also apply any migrations found in the <code>migrations</code>
directory inside each module which is enabled in the application.

If you run the <code>migrate</code> command again, it will show that the
migrations were applied already:

<pre>
Skipping applied migration: m20090611153243_CreateTables
Skipping applied migration: m20090612162832_CreateTags
Skipping applied migration: m20090612163144_RenameTagsTable
Skipping applied migration: m20090616153243_Test_CreateTables
</pre>

Since the <code>migrate</code> command checks based on the ID of each migration,
it can detect that a migration is already applied to the database and therefor
doesn't need to be applied anymore.

h2. Author information

This extension is created and maintained by Pieter Claerhout. You can contact
the author on:

* Website: http://www.yellowduck.be
* Twitter: http://twitter.com/pieterclaerhout
* Github: http://github.com/pieterclaerhout/yii-dbmigrations/tree/master
